---
layout: post
author: Jordan
---
# *Botanist*
## Case Study {#case-study-heading}

*Botanist* is an application for plant researchers, hobbyists, and enthusiasts. A user in the application has the ability to do the following:

1. Search a collection of over 380,000 plants from [Trefle.io](https://trefle.io/).
2. Read all available data for a given plant.
3. Store plants for further actions.
4. Report sighting of a plant at a given location using the [Mapquest](https://developer.mapquest.com/) API.
5. View all reported sightings of a given plant.
6. Generate directions to a given sighting using the [Mapquest](https://developer.mapquest.com/) API.
7. Write and save personal field notes, in addition to giving them an *Important* status if necessary.
8. Upload an image to associate with a field note.
9. Update a single field note.
10. Write, update, and complete tasks, in addition to assigning them difficulty status.

With this high-level overview of what the application is capable of, it's time to dive into the *how* and *why* of this application's creation.

---
## Introduction

Winter is a time for contemplation. For me, that means dreaming about all of the things I'm going to do in Spring. One thing I've always yearned to get experience with is growing crops.

I have some experience, as I used to work on an organic farm in Upstate NY; however, this work was mostly weeding cornfields from 7AM - 3PM during the summer, so I didn't get many opportunities to plant crops. 

The concept for a plant-growth application began to form in my head as I thought more about spring and its eventual return. 

I had already built [Stardew Valley Crop Assistant](https://stardew-valley-crop-assistant.herokuapp.com/), which is an application for planning, tracking, and visualizing plant growth and profits in the game *Stardew Valley*; however, I wanted this new application to be rooted firmly in reality.

Research began into various places I could source data from. I looked through the *USDA* and a few other APIs, and finally stumbled upon [Trefle.io](https://trefle.io/). 

**Trefle.io** is a public API which allows developers to query a database of over 380,000 plant species. The data that it contains for plants is nothing short of comprehensive. As I analyzed the data and the ways I could possibly use them, I quickly arrived to a new idea born from the death of my previous idea.

The data that can be retrieved from **Trefle** is comprehensive, but it does not contain specific information regarding growth requirements. For example, for certain attributes like 'Shade Tolerance', the data retrieved can be one of three values: intolerant, intermediate, or tolerant. This is good general information, but it is not specific enough to generate crop schedules, which was my original idea. This 'problem' actually turned out to be a great one; it lead me to the idea that *Botanist* is built from now.

Since the information is generalized, it's good for people who aren't specifically interested in growing, but are also interested in **all** information about certain plant species. These people could be people like me, who are wondering which plants may be good for growing during certain seasons; or, this could be good for researchers who study specific plants, battle invasive species, or build planting robots. I began to focus my thoughts on the latter of the two audiences.

What type of application would help a plant researcher in their field research?

Over the course of my thinking, I narrowed down what would help a plant researcher in their daily work to a few capabilities: 

1. The ability to report sightings at specific coordinates (latitude and longitude) using one's mobile device.
2. The ability to select plants to keep in a collection for further research.
3. The ability to write, update, and delete field notes while out in the field.
4. The ability to write, update, and complete tasks while out in the field.
5. The ability to glean massive amounts of information about a wide range of plant species in seconds.

With these in mind, I began researching applications which already exist for this purpose.

---
## Market Research

The first application I found which is catered to outdoor enthusiasts and plant researchers is [Invasives in Southern Forests](https://apps.apple.com/app/invasive-plants-in-southern/id495852751). Obviously, this application is extremely specific, and therefore limited in its usability. This application serves as a wiki with pictures and data for specific invasive plants. Overall, there wasn't much I could glean from it to improve the foundational ideas of my application.

[EDDMaps](https://www.eddmaps.org/) was another application I found, and this one revolves around users submitting sightings of invasive species, wildlife disease, and more. This was a very comprehensive application, and even had a wiki to back up its nice mapping feature. Using this application helped me see how beneficial it would be for users of my application to be able to **see** and **mark** on an in-browser map exactly where a plant was sighted.

One more application that I surveyed during my market research was [PlantNet](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.plantnet&hl=en_US), which allows users to submit photos of plants for real Botanists to report back with the plant species in the submitted picture. I **love** the interactivity of this application; maybe someday I'll include the ability for plant identification through picture. As it is now, this capability is out of the goals for my specific application, which has the intended audience of researchers who already know which plants they are looking for.

I surveyed several more applications, but in general, it was difficult to find a single application which did **all** of the things I had envisioned my application would be able to do. Each application had its own implementation of a certain capability, like mapping plant sightings, for instance, which helped solidify a more practical vision of my application. 

Now that the market had been surveyed exhaustively, it was time to plan out the application and identify the core challenges it would present.

---
## Design Challenges

The central challenge I saw with developing this application was the convenience of its use. For researchers out in the field, ease of use is of paramount concern. They may be walking through mud, up hills, or through dense forests; the last thing they need is a finicky application which has hard-to-press and hard-to-see buttons.

So, a **UI** which emphasized simplicity and ease-of-use was the first design concern. I decided to address this challenge with the following solutions:

1. All user events would be asynchronous. Eliminating page reloads would make for a much simpler and intuitive experience while out in the field.
2. Buttons would clearly be labeled with an appropriate name and/or icon. Additionally, consistently coloring and ordering similar operations would make the application easier to use, since the user can assume (correctly) that a certain button does a certain **type** of action each time it is clicked.
3. Design would be mobile-first, since the intended audience only uses it while on a mobile device. 

The second challenge I came upon was whether or not to include **users** as members of **teams**, where each **team** shares a common list of tasks, field notes, and plants to analyze and post sightings for. The alternative to this was to have **users** which were completely independent of one another and had their own tasks, field notes, and selected plants.

This was the problem I wrestled with the most. From a design standpoint, it wouldn't be too difficult to include users as members of teams. However, the problem came in with the following considerations:

1. How would tasks be sorted? By date? Member senority?
2. How would field notes be sorted / capable of being deleted or updated? Could one user update or delete another user's note?
3. Do most researchers work in the field as members of teams? Or, do they work independently and report their findings when necessary?
4. Would tasks have an overseer in the group? What privileges would an overseer have?

These considerations and many more ultimately led to the conclusion that I should create the application for individual users at first. Then, as users reported their experiences and suggestions, I could determine if **teams** would be a valuable addition to the application. 

From a cost/benefit standpoint, I saw incorporating teams from the beginning to be a bigger cost than benefit. During my research of Botanists and field research practices, I couldn't find a consensus on whether they worked in teams when out in the field; however, I can be 100% sure that they always work as individuals. So, I decided to start the application with individuals in mind, and not teams, since the former idea is much more certain than the latter.

The third design challenge that arose from choosing users as the central agent in the application is as follows: how much privacy would a user be given? For instance, the following considerations arise from that question:

1. Are field notes private to the user, or are they public to all users who also have that particular plant in their collection?
2. Are sightings private?
3. Are tasks private?
4. Is there a list of recorded searches?

With regards to the first question, I decided to make field notes completely private, as to not give away any private information (location, dates, times) of users inadvertantly through the sharing of field notes.

Sightings are completely public since this is (at this point) the central capability of the application. The ability to see and generate directions to extremely specific points on maps is the key to doing more research on a given plant species.

Tasks, like field notes, are completely private.

For the fourth and final consideration, I decided to not record any search history to preserve as much privacy as possible for users. From a cost/benefit standpoint, I saw no clear benefit in *remembering* user-searches. 

The final design challenge I thought of was whether or not to let users view and interact with one another. These capabilities could include:

1. Viewing profile information.
2. Sending messages.
3. Following sighting reports and receive notifications.

As I do with all problems, I analyze them through the lens of cost/benefit analysis. What are the potential benefits of including the aforementioned capabilities?

1. Richer user experience.
2. Possible friendship creation.

How about the costs?

1. Serious security compromises.
2. Notifications from other users could disrupt the flow of mobile-use in the field.

Overall, security was the biggest concern for me while designing this application. This is due to the fact that this application is designed for the purpose of being used out in remote locations. That being said, when one is out in remote locations they are potentially more vulnerable, as users may be alone while surveying out in the field.

For users of this application who are women, I foresaw a serious security risk with being able to see **where** a particular user tends to report sightings. One user could potentially scout out a location to find another one. 

Obviously, this situation is the worst-case scenario; however, as programmers we are **principally** concerned with the worst-case scenario. Just look at **big O** notation!

For this reason, I decided to make users completely private, beyond other users being able to see which user submitted a particular sighting.

I'm open to including more user interactivity per user suggestions as more people use the application, but for now, the cost **clearly** outweighs the benefits.




---
## Technologies

---
## Results

